.TH DDPTCTL "8" "May 2016" "ddpt\-0.96" DDPT
.SH NAME
ddptctl \- helper/auxiliary utility for ddpt
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ddptctl
[\fI\-\-abort\fR] [\fI\-\-all_toks\fR] [\fI\-\-block\fR] [\fI\-\-del_tkn\fR]
[\fI\-\-help\fR] [\fI\-\-immed\fR] [\fI\-\-info\fR] [\fI\-\-list_id=LID\fR]
[\fI\-\-oir=OIR\fR] [\fI\-\-poll\fR] [\fI\-\-pt=GL\fR] [\fI\-\-readonly\fR]
[\fI\-\-prefer_rcs\fR] [\fI\-\-receive\fR] [\fI\-\-rtf=RTF\fR]
[\fI\-\-rtype=RTYPE\fR] [\fI\-\-size\fR] [\fI\-\-timeout=ITO[,CMD]\fR]
[\fI\-\-verbose\fR] [\fI\-\-version\fR] [\fI\-\-wut=SL\fR] [\fIDEVICE\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.\" Add any additional description here
.PP
This utility is a helper/auxiliary for the ddpt utility which copies data
between or within SCSI devices (logical units). While ddpt's command line
syntax is modelled on that of the POSIX dd command, this utility has a more
standard Unix command line syntax with both short and long variants of each
option.
.PP
The T10 committee defines a family of SCSI commands for offloaded copy. The
central (but not the only) command is EXTENDED COPY often shortened to XCOPY
or xcopy. There are now two generations of xcopy, the older one is given the
suffix "LID1" and the newer one: "LID4". There is a subset of XCOPY(LID4)
that supports disk to disk copies and is based on the SBC\-3 commands:
POPULATE TOKEN (PT) and WRITE USING TOKEN (WUT). ODX is a market name that has
become associated with this subset. This utility can issue PT, WUT and related
commands, read the Third Party Copy VPD page and perform several other
housekeeping tasks.
.PP
The xcopy family of commands are described in the SPC\-4,5 and SBC\-3,4
documents found at http://www.t10.org .
.PP
Apart from PT and WUT, other command abbreviations used below are RRTI for the
RECEIVE ROD TOKEN INFORMATION command and RCS for the RECEIVE COPY
STATUS(LID4) command.
.SH OPTIONS
Arguments to long options are mandatory for short options as well.
.TP
\fB\-A\fR, \fB\-\-abort\fR
this option will issue the COPY OPERATION ABORT command with the \fILID\fR
given in the \fI\-\-list_id=LID\fR option. If the \fI\-\-list_id=LID\fR
option is not given then its default \fILID\fR (257) is used. If there is
an xcopy operation ongoing on this I\-T nexus (i.e. issued by this
machine to any LU sharing the same target) using that \fILID\fR then the
copy is aborted. Note there is a sense key (COPY ABORTED) indicating some
but not all data has been copied due to this action.
.TP
\fB\-a\fR, \fB\-\-all_toks\fR
send the REPORT ALL ROD TOKENS SCSI command to \fIDEVICE\fR and decode the
response. An ODX implementation is not required to support this command.
.TP
\fB\-B\fR, \fB\-\-block\fR
treat \fIDEVICE\fR as a block device when checking its \fI\-\-size\fR. The
default action of this utility is to treat \fIDEVICE\fR as a SCSI
pass\-through device.
.TP
\fB\-D\fR, \fB\-\-del_tkn\fR
set the DEL_TKN bit in a WUT command (default: clear the DEL_TKN bit).
Since an ODX copy manager deletes the ROD Token when its inactivity
time-out is reached, this option is typically not needed. It may
be useful for long\-lived ROD Tokens that are no longer needed.
.br
To delete an unused ROD Token a degenerate scatter list seems to be
acceptable (e.g. '\-\-wut=0,0 \-\-del_tkn').
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
outputs the usage message summarizing command line options then exits.
.TP
\fB\-I\fR, \fB\-\-immed\fR
set the IMMED bit in the PT or WUT command. When given the PT and WUT
commands return promptly before the data transfer is complete; then this
utility exits. The user should then invoke the utility again with the
\fI\-\-poll\fR option and the same \fILID\fR and \fIDEVICE\fR to await
completion and receive the final transfer count. The default action of
PT and WUT (i.e.  without this option) is to wait for completion (i.e.
all data transferred or an error occurs) before exiting this utility.
.TP
\fB\-i\fR, \fB\-\-info\fR
when the \fIDEVICE\fR argument is given then check its Third Party Copy VPD
page and print out anything found. Also check if the 3PC bit is set in the
standard INQUIRY response.
.br
If the \fIDEVICE\fR argument is not given and the \fI\-\-rtf=RTF\fR option
is given then decode part of the ROD Token held in the \fI\-\-RTF\fR file.
SPC\-4 defines some parts of a ROD Token that can be decoded but does not
require the copy manager to set these fields; so many fields may appear as
zeros. A \fI\-\-RTF\fR file that has been generated by the ddpt utility may
contain multiple ROD Tokens, each optionally followed by an 8 byte "number
of bytes represented" integer. They are all decoded, based on \fI\-\-RTF\fR
file length which should either be a multiple of 512 or 520 bytes.
.TP
\fB\-l\fR, \fB\-\-list_id\fR=\fILID\fR
\fILID\fR is a list identifier which is used to associate an originating
xcopy command (e.g. PT or WUT) with a follow\-up command that retrieves
associated information or aborts the operation. T10 requires each active
\fILID\fR to be unique on a given I\-T nexus. An I\-T nexus is the current
machine (more precisely a HBA if a machine has two or more) and a specific
target which will contain one or more logical units (LUs) of which
\fIDEVICE\fR is one. If the \fIDEVICE\fR's copy manager feels that rather
complex condition has not been met then an error is generated with sense
data that decodes to "operation in progress". Rather than try to work out
who is doing what elsewhere, try another \fILID\fR value.
.br
The default value for \fILID\fR is 257.
.TP
\fB\-O\fR, \fB\-\-oir\fR=\fIOIR\fR
\fIOIR\fR is the Offset In ROD, a field in the WUT command. It may be be
used together with the \fI\-\-wut=SL\fR option. Its default value is 0 and
its units are the logical block size of \fIDEVICE\fR.
.TP
\fB\-p\fR, \fB\-\-poll\fR
send RRTI (or RCS) command to the \fIDEVICE\fR using the \fILID\fR (i.e.
from the \fI\-\-list_id=LID\fR option). If a copy status is received
indicating the operation is ongoing, then this SCSI command is sent
periodically (as suggested by the previous RRTI (or RCS) command or every
500 milliseconds) until some other copy status is detected. If the
\fI\-\-list_id=LID\fR option is not given then a \fILID\fR of 257 is assumed.
.br
If the originating xcopy command was POPULATE TOKEN and the RRTI command
indicates that it has completed successfully then the associated
ROD Token (returned in the RRTI response) is written to the \fIRTF\fR
file. If the \fI\-\-rtf=RTF\fR option is not given then the ROD token is
written to a file called ddptctl_rod_tok.bin in the current directory.
.TP
\fB\-q\fR, \fB\-\-prefer_rcs\fR
prefers using the RECEIVE COPY STATUS (RCS) command over the RRTI command
which is the default. This only should be done following a WUT command
since after a PT command, the RRTI command is needed to fetch the ROD
tokane.
.TP
\fB\-P\fR, \fB\-\-pt\fR=\fIGL\fR
send a POPULATE TOKEN (PT) command with the given gather list. The format
of \fIGL\fR is given in the NOTES section. If used without the \fI\-\-immed\fR
option then this utility, after the PT command finishes successfully, will
call the RRTI command. When the RRTI command finishes, potentially with a
new ROD Token, this utility will exit. Prior to that exit, if a new ROD
Token is available and the \fI\-\-rtf=RTF\fR option is given then that
ROD Token is written to the \fIRTF\fR file. If the \fI\-\-rtf=RTF\fR
option is not given then the ROD token is written to a file called
ddptctl_rod_tok.bin in the current directory.
.br
If the \fI\-\-immed\fR option is given this utility will exit after the
PT command finishes. To complete the operation this utility should be
invoked again with the \fI\-\-poll\fR option and the same \fIDEVICE\fR.
.TP
\fB\-y\fR, \fB\-\-readonly\fR
open the \fIDEVICE\fR read\-only (e.g. in Unix with the O_RDONLY flag).
The default is to open it read\-write.
.TP
\fB\-R\fR, \fB\-\-receive\fR
send the RRTI (or RCS) SCSI command to the \fIDEVICE\fR using the
\fILID\fR (i.e. from the \fI\-\-list_id=LID\fR option). If the
\fI\-\-list_id=LID\fR option is not given then a \fILID\fR of 257 is assumed.
.br
If the originating xcopy command was POPULATE TOKEN and the RRTI command
indicates that it has completed successfully then the associated
ROD Token (returned in the RRTI response) is written to the \fIRTF\fR
file. If the \fI\-\-rtf=RTF\fR option is not given then the ROD token is
written to a file called ddptctl_rod_tok.bin in the current directory.
.TP
\fB\-r\fR, \fB\-\-rtf\fR=\fIRTF\fR
when \fIRTF\fR is a file containing an ODX ROD Token or the name of a file
the ROD Token is to be written to. A ROD Token used by ODX is 512 bytes
long. If the \fIRTF\fR file was produced by the ddpt utility then it might
contain multiple ROD Tokens, each optionally followed by an 8 byte integer
containing the "number of bytes represented" by the preceding ROD Token.
.br
If an \fIRTF\fR file with multiple ROD Tokens is given to this utility with
\fI\-\-wut=SL\fR then only the first ROD Token is used. If an \fIRTF\fR file
is being decoded (i.e. no \fIDEVICE\fR argument given) then all ROD Tokens
are decoded.
.TP
\fB\-t\fR, \fB\-\-rtype\fR=\fIRTYPE\fR
where \fIRTYPE\fR is the ROD Type, a field in the PT command (apart
from "zero"). The default value (0) indicates that the copy manager (in the
\fIDEVICE\fR) decides. \fIRTYPE\fR can be a decimal number, a hex
number (prefixed by 0x or with a "h" appended) or one
of "pit\-def", "pit\-vuln", "pit\-pers", "pit\-any" or "zero". The final
truncated word can be spelt out (e.g. "pit\-vulnerable"). The "pit\-"
lead\-in stands for "point in time" copy.
.br
The "zero" is a special case and is not given to a PT command. Instead it
causes a special Block Device Zero Token to be created that can be used
with the \fI\-\-wut=SL\fR option to write blocks of zeros to the given
\fIDEVICE\fR.
.TP
\fB\-s\fR, \fB\-\-size\fR
prints the number of blocks and the size of each block for the given
\fIDEVICE\fR. Protection information is printed if available. By default
uses the pass\-through interface and the READ CAPACITY command to obtain
this information. If the \fI\-\-block\fR option is given then the block
layer in the OS is query for size information (and protection information
is not reported).
.TP
\fB\-T\fR, \fB\-\-timeout\fR=\fIITO[,CMD]\fR
where \fIITO\fR is the inactivity timeout (units: seconds) given to the
PT command. The default is 0 in which case the copy manager uses its own
default which is shown in the Third party Copy VPD page.
.br
\fICMD\fR is the SCSI command timeout (units: seconds) applied to SCSI
commands issued by this utility; default is 0 which is translated to 600
seconds for originating xcopy commands (e.g. PT and WUT) and 60 seconds
for other commands. Best not to trigger command timeouts.
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-verbose\fR
increase the level of verbosity, (i.e. debug output).
.TP
\fB\-V\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
print the version string and then exit.
.TP
\fB\-w\fR, \fB\-\-wut\fR=\fISL\fR
send a WRITE USING TOKEN (WUT) command with the given scatter list. The
format of \fISL\fR is given in the NOTES section. This option requires
the \fI\-\-rtf=RTF\fR option to supply the ROD Token. If used without the
\fI\-\-immed\fR option then after the WUT command finishes successfully
this utility will call the RRTI command. When the RRTI command finishes
this utility will exit.
.br
If the \fI\-\-immed\fR option is given this utility will exit after the
WUT command finishes. To complete the operation this utility should be
invoked again with the \fI\-\-poll\fR option and the same \fIDEVICE\fR.
.SH NOTES
The scatter gather list given to the \fI\-\-pt=GL\fR and \fI\-\-wut=SL\fR
options in the simplest case contains a pair a numbers, separated by a
comma. The first number is the starting LBA and the second number is
the number of blocks (no bigger than 32 bits) to read to or write from that
starting LBA. Another pair of numbers can appear after that forming the
second element of a scatter gather list. Starting LBAs can be in any order
but T10 prohibits any logical block appearing more than once in a scatter
gather list.
.PP
Scatter gather lists can be placed in a file or read from stdin. A file
name referring to a file containing a scatter gather list must follow
the "@" character (e.g. \-\-pt=@my_sgl.txt"). Reading a list from stdin is
indicated by "@\-" or "\-" (e.g. "\-\-pt=\-"). Scatter gather lists in a
file have a looser format and can take spaces and tabs as well as a comma
as separators. Anything from and including a "#" on a line is ignored.
.PP
Both the PT and WUT commands are issued "as is" without checking the Third
Party Copy VPD page. The copy manager may well reject these commands (with
exit status 51: invalid field in parameter list) if the maximum range
descriptors field or the maximum token transfer size field are exceeded.
.PP
There is a web page discussing ddptctl and ddpt, XCOPY and ODX at
http://sg.danny.cz/sg/ddpt_xcopy_odx.html
.SH EXIT STATUS
The exit status of ddptctl is 0 when it is successful. Otherwise the exit
status for this utility is the same as that for ddpt. See the EXIT STATUS
section in the ddpt man page.
.SH EXAMPLES
First issue a PT command without the \fI\-\-immed\fR option so RRTI is
called to complete the operation:
.PP
  # ddptctl \-\-pt=0x0,10k,20k,5k \-\-rtf=aa.rt /dev/sdb
.br
  PT completes with a transfer count of 15360 [0x3c00]
.PP
The transfer count (10k + 5k == 15360) indicates the operation was successful
and the ROD Token is in the aa.rt file. Now use that ROD Token to write to
the same locations on /dev/sdc:
.PP
  # ddptctl \-\-rtf=aa.rt \-\-wut=0x0,10k,20k,5k /dev/sdc
.br
  WUT completes with a transfer count of 15360 [0x3c00]
.PP
So the copy was successful. Now taking a closer look at the ROD token:
.PP
  # ddptctl \-\-info --rtf=aa.rt
.br
  Decoding information from ROD Token:
.br
    ROD type: point in time copy - default [0x800000]
.br
    Copy manager ROD Token identifier: 0x520000710000000c
.br
    Creator Logical Unit descriptor:
.br
      Peripheral Device type: 0x0
.br
      Relative initiator port identifier: 0x0
.br
      designator_type: NAA,  code_set: Binary
.br
      associated with the addressed logical unit
.br
        0x60002ac0000000000000000c00009502
.br
    Number of bytes represented: 0 [0x0]
.br
    Device type specific data (for disk) has block size of 0; unlikely so skip
.br
    Target device descriptor: unexpected designator type [0x0]
.PP
T10 does not require implementations to supply much of the above (only the
ROD type and the token length) so expect to see some empty fields.
.PP
To see information about /dev/sdb relevant to ODX, try:
.PP
  # ddptctl --info /dev/sdb
.br
    /dev/sdb [readcap]: num_blks=209715200 [0xc800000], blk_size=512, 107 GB
.br
  3PC (third party copy) bit set in standard INQUIRY response
.br
   Third Party Copy VPD page:
.br
   Block Device ROD Token Limits:
.br
    Maximum Range Descriptors: 8
.br
    Maximum Inactivity Timeout: 60 seconds
.br
    Default Inactivity Timeout: 30 seconds
.br
    Maximum Token Transfer Size: 524288
.br
    Optimal Transfer Count: 524288
.PP
That maximum token transfer size [524288 blocks each 512 bytes gives 256 MB]
is the largest size a ROD Token created by /dev/sdb can hold. Use that and
show the \fI\-\-immed\fR option on the destination:
.PP
  # ddptctl --pt=0x0,0x80000 --rtf=aa.rt /dev/sdb
.br
  PT completes with a transfer count of 524288 [0x80000]
.PP
  # ddptctl --rtf=aa.rt --wut=0x0,0x80000 --immed /dev/sdc
.br
  Started ODX Write Using Token command in immediate mode.
.br
  User may need --list_id=257 on following invocation with --receive or
.br
  --poll for completion
.PP
  # ddptctl --poll --rtf=aa.rt /dev/sdc
.br
  RRTI for Write using token: Operation completed without errors
.br
    transfer count of 524288 [0x80000]
.PP
To copy larger amounts and/or with a larger number of scatter gather
elements (than 8 "range descriptors") use one of the four ODX variants in
the ddpt utility.
.SH AUTHORS
Written by Douglas Gilbert.
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs to <dgilbert at interlog dot com>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2014\-2016 Douglas Gilbert
.br
This software is distributed under a FreeBSD license. There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.B ddpt
