.TH DDPT_SGL "8" "April 2020" "ddpt\-0.97" DDPT
.SH NAME
ddpt_sgl \- helper for ddpt utility's scatter gather lists
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ddpt_sgl
[\fI\-\-action=ACT\fR] [\fI\-\-a\-sgl=SGL\fR] [\fI\-\-b\-sgl=SGL\fR]
[\fI\-\-chs=CHS\fR] [\fI\-\-degen=DV\fR] [\fI\-\-document\fR]
[\fI\-\-elem=SE[,LE]\fR] [\fI\-\-extension=FNE\fR] [\fI\-\-flexible\fR]
[\fI\-\-help\fR] [\fI\-\-hex\fR] [\fI\-\-iaf=IAF\fR] [\fI\-\-index=IA\fR]
[\fI\-\-interleave=IL\fR] [\fI\-\-non\-overlap\fR] [\fI\-\-out=O_SGL\fR]
[\fI\-\-quiet\fR] [\fI\-\-round=RB\fR] [\fI\-\-sort\-cmp=SC\fR]
[\fI\-\-stats\fR] [\fI\-\-verbose\fR] [\fI\-\-version\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.\" Add any additional description here
.PP
This utility is a scatter gather list helper for the ddpt utility which
copies data between or within SCSI devices (logical units). While ddpt's
command line syntax is modelled on that of the POSIX dd command, this
utility has a more standard Unix command line syntax with both short and
long variants of each option.
.PP
Scatter gather lists (sgl_s) are made up of scatter gather elements. Each
element is made up a starting logical block address (LBA) and a number of
blocks (NUM) from and including that LBA.
.PP
The scatter gather lists can also be viewed as arrays in which elements can
be accessed by an index. Multiple sgl elements can be accessed with an
array of indexes, hence index arrays. Indexes in this utility start at 0
and run to (n \- 1) where n is the number of elements in the sgl. Also
negative indexes are permitted where \-1 is the index of the last sgl
element, \-2 is the index of the second last sgl element, etc.
.PP
For "twin" actions there is an assumed relationship between a\-sgl and
b\-sgl as there is between two sgl_s used as the gather list (e.g. skip=)
and the scatter list (e.g. seek=) in the ddpt utility. Breaking it down
to individual logical blocks: LBAr0 is read and its data is written to
LBAw0, LBAr1\-\->LBAw1, LBAr2\-\->LBAw2, etc; or more generally
LBAr_n\-\->LNAw_n. Many actions will change the order in which
those "read\-write" items are performed, the twin portion of the action
attempts to maintain the LBAr_n\-\->LNAw_n mapping. Generally speaking,
copies are the same no matter what order the LBAs are read and written. One
exception is an overlapping scatter list (i.e. on the write side) in which
case the order of writes onto the same LBA does matter, hence there is an
option to check sgl_s are well\-formed in that respect:
\fI\-\-non\-overlap\fR.
.PP
For background on scatter gather lists see the section of that name in the
ddpt(8) manpage found in this package. There is a web page at
http://sg.danny.cz/sg/ddpt.html .
.SH OPTIONS
Arguments to long options are mandatory for short options as well.
.TP
\fB\-a\fR, \fB\-\-action\fR=\fIACT\fR
\fIACT\fR is some action to perform on the given scatter gather list(s).
To list the available actions set \fIACT\fR to 'xxx' (or 'enum'). The
available actions are listed in the ACTIONS section below.
.TP
\fB\-A\fR, \fB\-\-a\-sgl\fR=\fISGL\fR
\fISGL\fR is a scatter gather list, a sequence of comma separated unsigned
integers (up to 64 bits each). \fISGL\fR has several forms, the simplest
is: LBA0,NUM0,LBA1,NUM1,LBA2,NUM2... and there should be an even number
of values with the exception of LBA0 appearing by itself. In this case NUM0 is
assumed to be 0. Other \fISGL\fR forms are '@<filename>' and 'H@<filename>'
where the contents of the <filename> is parsed as a scatter gather list.
Since there are two options for inputting \fISGL\fRs, this one is termed as
the 'a\-sgl'.
.br
See the section on FILE FORMATS below and the section on SCATTER GATHER
LISTS in the ddpt(8) manpage for more information on sgl_s and their
associated terminology.
.TP
\fB\-B\fR, \fB\-\-b\-sgl\fR=\fISGL\fR
\fISGL\fR is a scatter gather list, a second list termed as the 'b\-sgl' to
differentiate it from the other sgl (a\-sgl).
.TP
\fB\-C\fR, \fB\-\-chs\fR=\fICHS\fR
\fICHS\fR is a 3 element tuple, separated by commas. Currently 16 bit values
from 1 to 0xffff are accepted (the cylinder can be one more: 0x10000 (or
65536)). The first value is the number of cylinders, the second value is the
number of heads (limited to 16), and the final value is the number
of sectors per track (limited to 255). Sectors are counted origin 1 according
to CHS conventions (cf. normal LBAs which nearly always count from 0).
.TP
\fB\-D\fR, \fB\-\-degen\fR=\fIDV\fR
\fIDV\fR of 0 (the default) means that all degenerate elements (apart from
the last) are ignored (and dropped from the internal representation which may
later be written to an output file). If \fIDV\fR is odd then a degenerate
element's LBA is taken into account when calculating the highest and lowest
LBA in a sgl (and may be included in an output file). If \fIDV\fR is even
(apart from a \fIDV\fR of 0) then a degenerate element's LBA it taken into
account when determining if a sgl is monotonic increasing, decreasing or
neither (and may be included in an output file).
.TP
\fB\-d\fR, \fB\-\-document\fR
this option causes information about the a sgl or index array to be written
as comments (i.e. lines starting with '#') to the beginning of output
file(s) created by this utility.
.br
If this option is given twice then the command line that caused the output
is added to the file as a comment (before any numbers are output).
.TP
\fB\-E\fR, \fB\-\-elem\fR=\fISE[,LE]\fR
this option allows a single sgl element (at position \fISE\fR (starting
element index)) to be output to \fIO_SGL\fR or \fIO_SGL\fR.\fIFNE\fR (or
\fIIAF\fR). \fISE\fR is origin 0. If \fILE\fR (last element index) is given
then a range of sgl elements are output starting at index \fISE\fR to index
\fILE\fR inclusive. If a "twin" operation is being performed then this
option only applies to the "a" side output, not the "twin" side. This
option is ignored by the output of the split_n and tsplit_n actions.

.br
Negative values for either \fISE\fR or \fILE\fR count from the end of
sgl. For example \fI\-\-elem=0,\-1\fR refers to the whole of the list.
.br
If \fILE\fR is less than \fISE\fR (after any negative indexes are
converted to their equivalent positive index) then that range is output
in reverse.
.TP
\fB\-e\fR, \fB\-\-extension\fR=\fIFNE\fR
\fIFNE\fR is the filename extension used when output filenames are
generated. For non\-split actions the generated filenames are of the form:
\fIO_SGL\fR.\fIFNE\fR . For the split_n action the generated filenames
are of the form: \fIO_SGL\fR[1..n].\fIFNE\fR . For the tsplit_n action
the a\-sg is named as per the previous sentence, while for the b\-sgl
the generated filenames are of the form: \fIO_SGL\fR[1..n]_t.\fIFNE\fR .
.br
If \fIO_SGL\fR is '\-' (by itself) then all output is sent to stdout and
this option is ignored.
.TP
\fB\-f\fR, \fB\-\-flexible\fR
this option effects the parsing (reading) of sgl_s and index arrays that
are in files which are in hexadecimal. Such files should have a leading
line (i.e. before any numbers) with 'HEX' on it. Without this option any
such file must be invoked with 'H@' before the filename; in other words
the 'H' in the invocation needs to match the 'HEX' in the file. With this
option a file can be invoked with '@' and if a line with 'HEX' is parsed
before any numbers then it switches to hexadecimal mode; so that all the
parsed numbers are assumed to be in hexadecimal.
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
outputs the usage message summarizing command line options then exits.
.TP
\fB\-H\fR, \fB\-\-hex\fR
used to define the numeric format of sgl and index array elements written to
output (often a file named \fIO_SGL\fR or stdout). If not given then only
decimal values are written to output. If this option is given once then
hexadecimal values, prefixed with '0x', are written. If this option is
given twice then a line with the string 'HEX' is written to output, before
any values, and those values are implicitly hexadecimal (i.e. no
leading '0x' nor 'h' suffix).
.TP
\fB\-I\fR, \fB\-\-iaf\fR=\fIIAF\fR
where \fIIAF\fR is a filename (or '\-' for stdout) to write an index array
to. The only action that generates an index array currently is
\fI\-\-action=sort\fR (and tsort). This option can be together used with, or
in place of, the \fI\-\-out=O_SGL\fR option.
.br
The \fI\-\-document\fR, \fI\-\-elem=SE[,LE]\fR and \fI\-\-hex\fR options
effect what is written. See the section on FILE FORMATS below.
.TP
\fB\-x\fR, \fB\-\-index\fR=\fIIA\fR
where \fIIA\fR is one or more indexes, comma separated or, if prefixed
by "@" or "H@", a filename containing a list of indexes. These indexes are
used by the \fI\-\-action=select\fR and \fI\-\-action=tselect\fR to
select elements from the 'a\-sgl'. Positive and negative indexes that are
too large (in absolute terms) are ignored and create noise if the
\fI\-\-verbose\fR option is given. See the section on FILE FORMATS below.
.TP
\fB\-i\fR, \fB\-\-interleave\fR=\fIIL\fR
\fIIL\fR is an integer, starting from 0. When \fIIL\fR is 0 (the default)
there is no interleave. The interleave only effects the split_n and tsplit_n
actions and when greater than zero is the maximum number of logical blocks
written in each segment in the output file, prior to moving to the next
output file.
.br
For the case where \fIIL\fR is 1 and \fI\-\-action=split_1\fR is given
then the output file will have every LBA (given by the a\-sgl) as a
separate sgl element (and thus each will have a NUM of 1).
.br
For the tsplit_n action the interleave is only applied to the a\-sgl
but it does effect the twin sgl files.
.TP
\fB\-N\fR, \fB\-\-non\-overlap\fR
Checks any given sgl and any resulting sgl (from an action) to see if
any portion of the sgl overlaps. This is done by first sorting each
sgl by the LBA field, then checking every element against the previous
one to determine if there is overlap. SCSI commands that accept sgl_s
process degenerate elements without error but if two elements in a
WRITE command overlap then it is the storage device's choice which one
to WRITE first. The last one to be written will be the one read in
subsequent read operations.
.br
If no errors are detected then if (all) are non\-overlapping then 0 is
returned. If no errors are detected then if (any) are overlapping then 36
is returned.
.TP
\fB\-o\fR, \fB\-\-out\fR=\fIO_SGL\fR
\fIO_SGL\fR is the name of a file to write a resultant scatter gather
list to. If \fIO_SGL\fR is '\-' then the output is directed to stdout.
If \fIO_SGL\fR starts with '+' then the output is appended to the file
whose name follows the '+'.
.br
For the split and tsplit actions, the leading '+' is interpreted as appended
to all files that meet the template and exist, otherwise the file is
created. If '\-' is given then all output is directed to stdout (and the
\fI\-\-extension=FNE\fR option, if given, is ignored).
.TP
\fB\-q\fR, \fB\-\-quiet\fR
suppresses warning and messages announcing an action has succeeded. When
this option is given, actions that have a logical (boolean) result don't
output messages but still yield an indicative exit status. The exit status
will typically be either 0 for true or 36 for false.
are typically sent to stderr.
.TP
\fB\-r\fR, \fB\-\-round\fR=\fIRB\fR
\fIRB\fR is the number of round blocks. Without the option the split_n action
will divide the number of blocks to be split by '<n>' (or use \fIIL\fR) to
get a nominal value. This value is the number of blocks taken from the a\-sgl
before moving to the next output file. The \fIRB\fR value (default 0) is
the maximum number of blocks the nominal value may be changed by to align
with an existing element boundary in the a\-sgl.
.br
If the number of blocks in 'a\-sgl is less than 10 or \fIRB\fR is greater
than one third of the nominal value, then \fIRB\fR is ignored (with a
notification written to stderr).
.br
For the tsplit_n action this option only applies to the a\-sgl.
.TP
\fB\-S\fR, \fB\-\-sort\-cmp\fR=\fISC\fR
where \fISC\fR is a value indicating what the sort action's comparison will
be. When \fISC\fR is 0 (the default) the sort is ascending based on the LBA;
when it is 1 the sort is descending based on LBA. When \fISC\fR is 2 the
sort is ascending based on NUM; when it is 3 the sort is descending based
on NUM. Any other value is mapped to 0. All sorts are stable which means
that sgl elements with the same LBA (in the case of \fISC\fR being 0 or 1)
keep their same relative position. A side effect of this is that the
ascending and descending sorts are not always reversals of one another.
.TP
\fB\-s\fR, \fB\-\-stats\fR
print out sgl statistics on any given sgl and any resultant sgl.
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-verbose\fR
increase the level of verbosity, (i.e. debug output).
.TP
\fB\-V\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
print the version string and then exit.
.SH ACTIONS
Actions are given on the command line as part of the \fI\-\-action=ACT\fR
option. Currently only one action is allowed per invocation. If more are
allowed in the future, they will be comma separated and performed in the
order in which they appear (i.e. left to right).
.PP
If no action is given and the \fI\-\-a\-sgl=SGL\fR and \fI\-\-out=O_SGL\fR
options (with no \fI\-\-b\-sgl=SGL\fR option) are given then the a\-sgl
is copied to \fIO_SGL\fR (or \fIO_SGL\fR.\fIFNE\fR if the
\fI\-\-extension=FNE\fR option is given).
.PP
The actions are listed below in alphabetical order.
.TP
\fBappend\-b2a\fR
appends the b\-sgl to the end of the a\-sgl and outputs the result to
\fIO_SGL\fR (or \fIO_SGL\fR.\fIFNE\fR if the \fI\-\-extension=FNE\fR option
is given). Requires the \fI\-\-a\-sgl=SGL\fR, \fI\-\-b\-sgl=SGL\fR and
\fI\-\-out=O_SGL\fR options.
.TP
\fBdivisible<n>[,L|N]\fR or \fBdivisible_<n>[,L|N]\fR
where <n> is an integer, 1 or higher. This action checks if each LBA and NUM
in a\-sgl is divisible by <n> (where 'is divisible' is equivalent to having a
remainder of zero). If all are divisible then true is returned (i.e. the exit
status 0); otherwise false is returned (i.e.  exit status 36).
.br
If the optional ",L" suffix (or ",LBA") is given then only each LBA element
in a\-sgl is checked for divisibility. If the optional ",N" suffix (or ",NUM")
then only each NUM element in a\-sgl is checked for divisibility.
.br
The output of the string to stderr announcing divisibility, or lack of it, can
be suppressed by the \fI\-\-quiet\fR option.
.TP
\fBenum\fR
prints out the list of supported actions then exits. Giving the action 'xxx'
has the same effect.
.TP
\fBequal\fR
this action compares the sgl_s given to \fI\-\-a\-sgl=SGL\fR and
\fI\-\-b\-sgl=SGL\fR. If the same LBAs are in the same order with the same
overall number of blocks (but not necessarily the same number of elements)
then true is returned (i.e. the exit status 0); otherwise false is
returned (i.e.  exit status 36). For example the two element
sgl "0x10,0x5, 0x15,0x2" is 'equal' to the one element sgl "0x10, 0x7".
.br
The output of the string to stderr announcing equality, or lack of it, can
be suppressed by the \fI\-\-quiet\fR option.
.TP
\fBnone\fR
this action does nothing. This is the default action. If \fI\-\-a\-sgl=SGL\fR
and \fI\-\-out=O_SGL\fR options are given and no other action, then a\-sgl
is copied to \fIO_SGL\fR.
 It is a placeholder.
.TP
\fBpart\-equal\fR
this action is similar to the \fBequal\fR action but relaxes the condition
that both lists must have the same overall number of blocks. For example the
two element sgl "0x10,0x5, 0x15,0x2" is 'part\-equal' to the one element
sgl "0x10, 0x12".
.TP
\fBpart\-same\fR
this action is similar to the \fBsame\fR action but relaxes the condition
that both lists must have the same overall number of blocks. For example the
two element sgl "0x15,0x2,0x10,0x5" is 'part\-same' as the one element
sgl "0x10, 0x12".
.TP
\fBsame\fR
this action is similar to the \fBequal\fR action but relaxes the condition
that both lists must be in the same order. The implementation sorts both
given lists before comparing them.  For example the two element
sgl "0x15,0x2, 0x10,0x5" is the 'same' as the one element sgl "0x10, 0x7".
.TP
\fBscale<n>\fR or \fBscale_<n>\fR
where <n> is an integer, positive or negative but not zero. When <n> is
positive then the starting LBA and the NUM in each a\-sgl element is
multiplied by <n> . The new (scaled) sgl is written to \fIO_SGL\fR (or
\fIO_SGL\fR.\fIFNE\fR if the \fI\-\-extension=FNE\fR option is given).
.br
When <n> is negative then the absolute value of <n> is used as a divisor
for each starting LBA and NUM in each a\-sgl element.
.br
As an example: converting a 512 byte logical block (LB) size sgl to a 4096
byte LB size and vice versa is relatively common. To convert from 4096 \-\->
512 byte LB size then \fI\-\-action=scale_8\fR is appropriate. To convert
from 512 \-\-> 4096 byte LB size then \fI\-\-action=scale_\-8\fR is
appropriate.
.br
Note: because an integer division is used (that rounds 'towards zero')
when <n> is negative then LBs or NUMs may be "lost" in this conversion. This
can be checked beforehand with the \fI\-\-action=divisible<n>[,L|N]\fR
option. For example: for 512 \-\-> 4096 conversions:
\fI\-\-action=divisible_8\fR will report if any starting LBAs or NUMs are
not divisible be 8 and hence are not able to be precisely represented as
4096 byte LB addresses or number of 4096 byte blocks.
.TP
\fBselect\fR
this action can be used to select a subset (or superset) of the a\-sgl in the
specified order. Alternatively it can be seen as re-ordering the elements
in a\-sgl such as is done toward the end of a sort operation. Assuming all
the indexes in \fIIA\fR are valid, then the \fIO_SGL\fR file will have the
same number of elements as there are indexes in \fIIA\fR.
.br
This option requires non\-empty \fI\-\-a\-sgl=SGL\fR and \fI\-\-index=IA\fR
options, plus the \fI\-\-out=O_SGL\fR option.
.TP
\fBsort\fR
this action will sort the sgl given by \fI\-\-a\-sgl=SGL\fR in ascending
order by LBA. The resulting sgl is output to \fIO_SGL\fR (or
\fIO_SGL\fR.\fIFNE\fR if the \fI\-\-extension=FNE\fR option is given).
.br
The sort is "stable", so if two elements have the same starting LBA then
they will appear in the same relative order in the output.
.TP
\fBsplit<n>\fR or \fBsplit_<n>\fR
where <n> is an integer, 1 or higher. This action divides
\fI\-\-a\-sgl=SGL\fR into <n> roughly equal length (i.e. number of blocks)
output sgl_s. The output files are named "\fIO_SGL\fR<1..n>"
or "\fIO_SGL\fR<1..n>.\fIFNE\fR". Both the \fI\-\-interleave=IL\fR and
\fI\-\-round=RB\fR options are taken into account during the split process.
.TP
\fBto\-chs\fR
this action takes the 'flat' LBA SGL given to \fI\-\-a\-sgl=SGL\fR and
converts it into CHS (cylinder/head/sector) based SGL which is written
out as directed to \fI\-\-out=O_SGL\fR. This action requires the
\fI\-\-chs=CHS\fR option as well as the \fI\-\-a\-sgl=SGL\fR and
\fI\-\-out=O_SGL\fR options.
.TP
\fBtselect\fR
this is a "twin select" action that selects from
\fI\-\-a\-sgl=SGL\fR (a\-sgl) then re\-orders \fI\-\-b\-sgl=SGL\fR (b\-sgl)
in unison. The select from a\-sgl is the same as described under the
select action above. Additionally b\-sgl is is broken up so it has "breaks"
at the same positions (i.e. number of blocks from the start of the sgl) as
a\-sgl does; plus the "breaks" b\-sgl has already got. So the "broken up"
b\-sgl will have at least as many elements as a\-sgl. The output of the
re\-ordered b\-sgl is then written to \fIO_SGL\fR_t or
\fIO_SGL\fR_t.\fIFNE\fR if the \fI\-\-extension=FNE\fR option is given.
.TP
\fBtsort\fR
this is a "twin sort" action that sorts \fI\-\-a\-sgl=SGL\fR (a\-sgl) and
re\-orders \fI\-\-b\-sgl=SGL\fR (b\-sgl) in unison. The sort of a\-sgl is
the same as described under the sort action above. Additionally b\-sgl is
is broken up so it has "breaks" at the same positions (i.e. number of blocks
from the start of the sgl) as a\-sgl does; plus the "breaks" b\-sgl has
already got. So the "broken up" b\-sgl will have at least as many elements
as a\-sgl. The re\-ordering vector generated by the stable sort of a\-sgl
is then applied to the broken up b\-sgl. The output of the re\-ordered
b\-sgl is then written to \fIO_SGL\fR_t or \fIO_SGL\fR_t.\fIFNE\fR if the
\fI\-\-extension=FNE\fR option is given.
.TP
\fBtsplit<n>\fR or \fBtsplit_<n>\fR
this is a "twin split" action that splits the \fI\-\-a\-sgl=SGL\fR and
\fI\-\-b\-sgl=SGL\fR into separate series of output files. These separate
series maintain the LBA to LBA correspondence of the original a_sgl and
b_sgl lists. <n> is an integer, 1 or higher. This action divides
\fI\-\-a\-sgl=SGL\fR into <n> roughly equal length (i.e. number of blocks)
output sgl_s. The "roughly equal length" is influenced by the
\fI\-\-interleave=IL\fR and \fI\-\-round=RB\fR options. The output filenames
are generated the same way as described for the split action. The sgl
from \fI\-\-a\-sgl=SGL\fR is expected to be a "hard" sgl which means its
last element should not be degenerate (i.e. have a NUM of 0).
.br
The second half of the "twin split" is to split the \fI\-\-b\-sgl=SGL\fR
sgl. The same number of output files are used as for the 'A' side but
the filenames have a slightly different form: "\fIO_SGL\fR<1..n>_t"
or "\fIO_SGL\fR<1..n>_t.\fIFNE\fR" (if the \fI\-\-extension=FNE\fR option
is given). The critical point of this split is that it moves in lockstep
with the 'A' side split in the sense that whatever block count an 'A'
side segment uses, the following 'B' side segment split uses the same
block count. The sgl from \fI\-\-b\-sgl=SGL\fR may be a "hard" or "soft"
sgl. In the simplest case the 'B' side sgl can be just '0' which gets
expanded to '0,0' (i.e. degenerate list starting at LBA 0); this will use
the overall block count from the 'A' side.
.SH FILE FORMATS
Both sgl_s and index arrays can be read from, or written to, files.
The options that supply sgl_s or index arrays to be read (e.g.
\fI\-\-a\-sgl=SGL\fR, \fI\-\-b\-sgl=SGL\fR and \fI\-\-index=IA\fR) by
default allow them to be given directly on the command line. These
will typically be comma separated lists (although space and tab could be
used as separators if they were appropriately escaped). So with these
options when reading sgl_s and index arrays, a leading "@" or "H@" is
needed to indicate that a file name follows.
.PP
By default, numbers given in this utility and other utilities in this
package are assumed to be in decimal. Hexadecimal (hex) numbers can be given
with either a leading "0x" or trailing "h". A whole file can be flagged
as containing hex numbers (and thus not needing a leading "0x" nor
trailing "h" on each number) by using "H@" on the command line before the
filename. The file itself may contain a line with 'HEX' in it, prior to any
numbers that are to be parsed. If the \fI\-\-flexible\fR option is given
then "@" can be used before the filename and when 'HEX' is detected in the
file (before any numbers) the code switches to hex mode. Without the
\fI\-\-flexible\fR option "H@" must be use before the filename. As a
convenience the 'HEX' string may appear after hex numbers have been
decoded and it will be ignored. This is to allow hex sgl_s files to
be concatenated together and still be parsed without error.
.PP
A file being parsed may contain comments following a "#" symbols.
Everything from and include the hash mark to the end of a line is
ignored. Blank lines and "whitespace" (spaces, tabs, CRs and LFs) are
also ignored.
.PP
If large sgl_s or index arrays are being used it is better to have one
element per line in the file to be read. This is because a line is not
expected to be over 1024 bytes long with more than 254 parsable items on
it.  This utility imposes no limit on the number of lines a file to be
parsed may have.
.PP
Files to be written out by this utility have their names specified by the
\fI\-\-out=O_SGL\fR (optionally together with \fI\-\-extension=FNE\fR) and
the \fI\-\-iaf=IAF\fR options. Unlike the file reading options, no "@"
character should be placed in front of the filename on the command line. If
a filename of "\-" is given then output is written to stdout instead of a
file. stdout is normally the console. If the filename starts with "+" then
that character is skipped the output will be appended to that file, if
it exists. If the filename starts with "+" and the file does not exist
then it is created. If "+" is not given and the file already exists then
it is truncated (to 0) then overwritten. Some output file names have
numbers (e.g. as a result of the \fI\-\-action=spilt_<n>\fR option)
or "_t" (e.g. as a result of "twin" actions) appended to them (before the
extension, if any). Sgl elements are output one per line, with a comma
separating the LBA and the NUM. Index arrays are output one element (an
index) per line. The \fI\-\-hex\fR option controls the form of those
numbers output. If \fI\-\-hex\fR is not given, the numbers are output in
decimal. If the \fI\-\-hex\fR option is given one the number are output
in hex with a "0x" prefix. If the \fI\-\-hex\fR option is given twice then
the line 'HEX' is written to the file before any numbers and those numbers
are in hex without any adornment (i.e. with no leading "0x").
.PP
If the \fI\-\-document\fR option is given then some information including
a date timestamp of generation is placed as comments at the beginning of
files that are written out by this utility. If the \fI\-\-document\fR option
is given twice then the invocation line of this utility that caused the
output is placed in the written file as an additional comment.
.PP
The written file format is compatible with the read file format. So, for
example, a sgl generated by a invocation of this utility can later be used
as a file to be read by another invocation of this utility.
.SH EXIT STATUS
The exit status of ddpt_sgl is 0 when it is successful. Note that some
options and actions that return a boolean value return 0 for true and
36 for false. Otherwise the exit status for this utility is the same as
that for ddpt. See the EXIT STATUS section in the ddpt man page.
.SH EXAMPLES
Examples are needed. See testing/test_sgl.sh script in this package. That
script can be run without root permissions and places its work file (sgl_s)
in the /tmp directory.
.SH AUTHORS
Written by Douglas Gilbert.
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs to <dgilbert at interlog dot com>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2018\-2020 Douglas Gilbert
.br
This software is distributed under a FreeBSD license. There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.B ddpt(8), ddptctl(8)


